feat: add more React components to the Hilla documentation (#2296)
vaadin/docs: articles/react/components/crud/index.adoc

---
title: CRUD
description: CRUD is a component for managing a dataset. It allows for easy displaying, editing, creating, and deleting of items.
---

= CRUD

:commercial-feature: CRUD
include::{articles}/_commercial-banner.asciidoc[opts=optional]

[source,tsx]
----
<Crud items={people} include="firstName, lastName, email, profession" />
----

== Columns

CRUD automatically generates columns for each field in the provided dataset.
You can add columns with it and configure or remove existing ones.

[source,tsx]
----
<Crud
  items={people}
  exclude="lastName, address, id, subscribe, membership, pictureUrl, manager"
/>
----

== Editor

Data is edited using CRUD's editor UI.

=== Opening the editor

> By default, the editor is opened by clicking the edit Button in the last column. However, this button column can be removed if you want to provide an alternative way to engage the editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, the editor is opened by clicking the [guibutton]*Edit* button in the last column. However, this button column can be removed if you want to implement another way to open the editor.
```

For example, you can have it open using a double click like so:

[source,tsx]
----
<Crud
  title="Work in progress"
  include="firstName, lastName, email, profession"
  editedItem={editedItem}
  items={people}
  onEditedItemChanged={onEditedItemChanged}
>
  <Grid slot="grid" onDoubleClick={onDoubleClick}>
    <GridColumn path="firstName" header="First name"></GridColumn>
    <GridColumn path="lastName" header="Last name"></GridColumn>
    <GridColumn path="email" header="Email"></GridColumn>
    <GridColumn path="profession" header="Profession"></GridColumn>
  </Grid>
</Crud>
----

=== Editor position

The editor can be positioned in an overlay, on the side, or at the bottom.

==== Overlay (default)

The overlay position renders the editor in a modal overlay.
Overlays aren't constrained to the CRUD's size. This makes them ideal for complex forms.
However, they block the user from viewing and interacting with the Grid beneath.

==== Aside

The `aside` position displays the editor as an overlay next to the grid.

> Use this position when there is sufficient horizontal space to accommodate both the grid and the editor, and when it's beneficial for the user to be able to view and interact with the grid while the editor is open.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use this position when there is enough horizontal space to accommodate both the grid and the editor, and when it's beneficial for the user to see and interact with the grid while the editor is open.
```

On small viewports, like mobile phones, the editor always opens up as a full-screen overlay, regardless of this configuration.

=== Editor content

The editor's content is fully configurable, except for the header and footer.

[source,tsx]
----
const people = usePeople();
const [professions, setProfessions] = useState<String[]>([]);

const responsiveSteps = [
  { minWidth: "0", columns: 1 },
  { minWidth: "30em", columns: 2 },
];

useEffect(() => {
  setProfessions(
    Array.from(new Set(people.map((person) => person.profession))).sort()
  );
}, [people]);

return (
  <Crud include="firstName, lastName, email, profession" items={people}>
    <FormLayout
      slot="form"
      style={{ maxWidth: "480px" }}
      responsiveSteps={responsiveSteps}
    >
      <TextField label="First name" path="firstName" required />
      <TextField label="Last name" path="lastName" required />
      <EmailField colspan="2" label="Email" path="email" required />
      <ComboBox
        colspan="2"
        label="Profession"
        path="profession"
        items={professions}
        required
      />
    </FormLayout>
  </Crud>
);
----

==== Editor actions

.The editor contains three Buttons:

> * *"Delete"* shows a confirmation dialog asking the user to verify whether they wish to delete the item.
> * *"Cancel"* closes the editor unless there are unsaved changes. If there are, a confirmation dialog is shown and the user can either discard the changes or go back to editing.
> * *"Save"* saves the changes and closes the editor. This is disabled until a change is made.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [guibutton]*Delete* deletes the item permanently. The user is asked to confirm, after clicking this button, if they really wish to delete the item.
* [guibutton]*Cancel* closes the editor unless there are unsaved changes. If there are, the user is asked to either discard the changes or go back to editing.
* [guibutton]*Save* saves the changes and closes the editor. This is disabled until a change is made.
```

== Grid replacement

CRUD's default Grid is replaceable.
This is useful when you wish to customize the Grid. An example might be if you want to place the edit Button in the first column, or to apply <<../grid#tooltips,tooltips>>.
See <<../grid#,Grid documentation>> for details on configuring grids.

[source,tsx]
----
<Crud include="firstName, lastName, email, profession" items={people}>
  <Grid slot="grid">
    <CrudEditColumn />
    <GridColumn path="firstName" header="First name" />
    <GridColumn path="lastName" header="Last name" />
    <GridColumn path="email" header="Email" />
    <GridColumn path="profession" header="Profession" />
  </Grid>
</Crud>
----

.Edit column
[NOTE]
You need to add explicitly an edit column to the replacement Grid to edit items.
Additionally, Grid doesn't have sorting and filtering enabled by default.

== Toolbar

> Creating new items is done via the “New item” Button in CRUD's toolbar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating new items is done via the [guibutton]*New item* Button in CRUD's toolbar.
```

Both the toolbar and its Button are customizable.
For example, you can use the toolbar to display statistics such as the size of the dataset or the number of search results.

[source,tsx]
----
<Crud include="firstName, lastName, email, profession" items={people}>
  <div slot="toolbar">
    Total: <b>{people.length}</b> employees
  </div>
</Crud>
----

=== Hiding the toolbar

> The toolbar can be hidden if it isn't needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can hide the toolbar if it isn't needed.
```

[source,tsx]
----
<Crud include="firstName, lastName" items={people} noToolbar />
----

> == Related Components

Reviewer: ```suggestion
== Related components
```
